# Uxn 101
> Uxn is a virtual stack-machine designed to host the Hundred Rabbits projects.

Uxn was designed with one goal in mind: **simplicity**. There are only a handful
of operation codes, two stacks, and some memory. It was mainly designed to host
simple graphical applications.

We chose Uxn as the target architecture for this project because:
- it is **simple**, you've implemented everything with 32 opcodes and some modes.
- the emulator **can be embedded easily** into the repository, meaning you don't have to worry about installing a Uxn emulator yourself or anything to try out your generated code.
- it is **readable**, once you've got your feet wet with Uxn, it is pretty easy to read the ROM files in a hex editor and figure out what's going wrong.
## Exemple
```
a0 01 12 60 00 01 00 94   80 18 17 21 94 20 ff f7  
22 6c 48 65 6c 6c 6f 20   57 6f 72 6c 64 21 00

// Prints "Hello World!"
```
## Stack machines
Uxn is a [stack machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_machine). Instead of
putting values in and out of registers, values are pushed and popped to and from the
stack by operations.

For example, the `ADD` operation would pop two numbers from the stack, then push
the result of adding them together:
```
PUSH 01 | 01
PUSH 03 | 01 03
ADD     | 04
```

Uxn uses two circular stacks of 256 bytes: the work stack (`WRK`) and return stack (`RET`). 

For more informations, see here: [Uxn stacks](https://wiki.xxiivv.com/site/uxntal_stacks.html)
## Memory
Uxn offers 64 kilo-bytes of addressable memory, or RAM. You can assume that this RAM
is zeroed at the start of execution, except for the contents of your program which are
stored starting at address `0x100`.

In Uxn **you can modify your own program**. This is called [self-modifying code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-modifying_code)
and is considered an anti-pattern in softawre engineering in general, but here
you can take advantage of it if you'd like! Don't do it outside of those labs, tho
(or only if you know what you're doing).
## Operation codes
Everything about Uxn opcodes can be found here: [Uxn Reference](https://wiki.xxiivv.com/site/uxntal_opcodes.html).

There are 31 common operations and 8 immediate mode operations in Uxn.
The 31 common operations can be extended using 3 "modes":
- **short mode** (noted `2`) works on values of 16 bits instead of 8.
- **return mode** (noted `r`) changes the target stack of the operation from `WRK` to `RET`.
- **keep mode** (noted `k`) forbids consuming any item from the stack.
